# Technical Guideline TR-03183: Cyber

# Resilience Requirements for

# Manufacturers and Products

#### Part 2: Software Bill of Materials (SBOM)


```
Document history
```
Page 2 of 20 Federal Office for Information Security

Document history

_Table 1 : Document History_

```
Version Date Description
1.0 2023 - 07 - 12 Version of TR- 03183 - 2 for first publication
```
```
1.1 2023 - 11 - 28 Translate to English; update requirements for
creator, version and licence information
```
```
2.0.0 2024 - 09 - 20 Add some definitions and updates in “Terms used”,
“Level of detail”, and “Explanations”; add sections
“Dependency”, “Express specifications” and “Entry
into force and transitional system”; add required
data fields (actual filename, executable property,
archive property, structured property); add
additional field (concluded licences); move source
code hash from additional field to optional field; add
optional field (declared licences); update CycloneDX
minimum version requirement from 1.4 to 1.5; alter
hash value of executable component to hash value of
deployable component; alter URI of the executable
form of the component to URI of the deployable
form of the component; extend the definition of
components
```
Federal Office for Information Security
P.O. Box 20 03 63
53133 Bonn
E-Mail: TR03183@bsi.bund.de
Internet: https://bsi.bund.de/dok/TR- 03183
© Federal Office for Information Security 2023 , 2024


## Table of Contents


1 Introduction

- Federal Office for Information Security Page 3 of
- 1 Introduction Table of Contents
- 2 Requirements Language
- 3 Basics
   - 3.1 Definition of SBOM
   - 3.2 Terms used
      - 3.2.1 Component
      - 3.2.2 External component
      - 3.2.3 Executable file
      - 3.2.4 Dependency...........................................................................................................................................................................
      - 3.2.5 Vendor/Supplier vs. creator
- 4 SBOM formats
- 5 Content requirements
   - 5.1 Level of detail
   - 5.2 Required data fields
      - 5.2.1 Required data fields for the SBOM itself
      - 5.2.2 Required data fields for each component
   - 5.3 Additional data fields
      - 5.3.1 Additional data fields for the SBOM itself
      - 5.3.2 Additional data fields for each component
   - 5.4 Optional data fields
      - 5.4.1 Optional data fields for each component
- 6 Express specifications
   - 6.1 Licence identifiers and expressions
- 7 Transitional system
- 8 Annex........................................................................................................................................................................................................
   - 8.1 Explanations
      - 8.1.1 Machine-processable
      - 8.1.2 Components
      - 8.1.3 Executable property
      - 8.1.4 Archive property
      - 8.1.5 Structured property
      - 8.1.6 Component creator
      - 8.1.7 Scope of delivery
      - 8.1. 8 Path to component
      - 8.1.9 Licence Information
      - 8.1.10 Vulnerability information
   - 8.1.11 Digital Signature Page 4 of 20 Federal Office for Information Security
   - 8.1. 12 BOM links
- 8.2 Level of detail of an SBOM
   - 8.2.1 Top-level SBOM
   - 8.2.2 n - level SBOM
   - 8.2.3 Transitive SBOM
   - 8.2.4 Delivery item SBOM
   - 8.2.5 Complete SBOM
- 8.3 SBOM classification
   - 8.3. 1 Design SBOM
   - 8.3.2 Source SBOM
   - 8.3.3 Build SBOM
   - 8.3.4 Analysed SBOM
   - 8.3.5 Deployed SBOM
   - 8.3.6 Runtime SBOM
- 8.4 Further information
   - 8.4.1 Information from the NTIA
   - 8.4.2 Information from CISA


1 Introduction

## Federal Office for Information Security Page 3 of

1 Introduction

This Technical Guideline describes the requirements for a “Software Bill of Materials (SBOM)”. An SBOM is a
machine-processable document and corresponds to an electronic bill of materials / parts list. It inventories a
code base and thus contains information on all components used in a software. This information can be
presented in different breadth and depths - ranging from a basic structure to a fine-granular breakdown of
software products and their components. Different formats exist for the representation and distribution of
an SBOM.

An SBOM should be used by every software creator and provider in order to be able to transparently
represent software complexity and to know which components (e.g. libraries) are used. This knowledge is
essential for software management processes, especially for a continuous IT security process and the
lifecycle management of software; it is therefore considered “best practice” for a secure software supply
chain. An SBOM can be public or non-public and can be distributed in different ways. Typically, software
creators use one or more third-party components. They create and manage the SBOMs of their own
software; likewise, they take the consumer role of the SBOMs of the included components. The abundance
of SBOM information and the possible differences in the structure of SBOMs mean a great deal of work for
each creator. Only automation can effectively address that.

SBOM information can be used to check whether a product is potentially affected by a vulnerability by
comparing its component list with the components listed in a vulnerability database. However, an SBOM
does not contain any statement regarding vulnerabilities or their exploitability. SBOM data for a given
software version is considered static, while vulnerability information is of dynamic characteristics. Whether
and to which extent a vulnerability of an integrated component poses a risk to the product covered by the
SBOM should not be detailed by the SBOM. The exchange of vulnerability information and the potential
impact should be facilitated, by means of Security Advisories e.g. CSAF^1 (Common Security Advisory
Framework) or VEX^2 (Vulnerability Exploitability Exchange).

In order to confirm whether a product is affected by a vulnerability or not, it is necessary to compare the
SBOM of the product with vulnerability information, such as the CVE (Common Vulnerabilities and
Exposures) or Security Advisories of the component manufacturers or providers. Furthermore, an analysis
of the software itself is necessary to determine how its potentially affected subcomponents are used, and
thus whether and how one's own software product is affected. This must be carried out as part of the
vulnerability management for the product. The result of this analysis is then provided to the users of the
software as a Security Advisory or VEX for the product.

Originally, SBOMs were mainly used for license management. This Technical Guideline also specifies this
use case in an interoperable manner, in order to provide a complete set of requirements for the common
use cases of SBOMs.

In the current draft of the Cyber Resilience Act (CRA)^3 the compilation of an SBOM is mandatory. The CRA
is a market access regulation of the EU for products with digital elements, which obliges their providers to
continuously operate a vulnerability management process and to provide information on their products in
a transparent and comprehensible form. In the US, an SBOM is already required for software acquired by
the Federal government by the US Executive Order 14028 of May 2021^4 and the FDA (Food and Drug
Administration) demands an SBOM to be submitted as part of the approval of new medical devices since
March 2023^5.

(^1) https://csaf.io/
(^2) https://www.ntia.gov/files/ntia/publications/vex_one-page_summary.pdf
(^3) https://ec.europa.eu/transparency/documents-register/detail?ref=COM(2022)454&lang=en
(^4) https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/presidential-actions/2021/05/12/executive-order-on-improving-
the-nations-cybersecurity/ Section 4
(^5) https://www.congress.gov/117/bills/hr2617/BILLS-117hr2617enr.pdf Section 3305


## 2 Requirements Language

Page 6 of 20 Federal Office for Information Security

2 Requirements Language

The key words “MUST”, “MUST NOT”, “REQUIRED”, “SHALL”, “SHALL NOT”, “SHOULD”, “SHOULD NOT”,
“RECOMMENDED”, “NOT RECOMMENDED”, “MAY”, and “OPTIONAL” in this document are to be
interpreted as described in BCP 146 (RFC 21197 , RFC 81748 ) when, and only when, they appear in all capitals,
as shown here.

(^6) https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/bcp
(^7) https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc
(^8) https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc


## 3 Basics

Federal Office for Information Security Page 7 of 20

3 Basics

### 3.1 Definition of SBOM

A “Software Bill of Materials” (SBOM) is a machine-processable file containing supply chain relationships
and details of the components used in a software product. It supports automated processing of information
on these components. This covers both the so-called “primary component” and used (e.g. external/third-
party) components.

An SBOM MUST contain certain minimum information (see section 5 ), but MAY be expanded and detailed
as desired. It describes any relationship of the covered components as detailed in section 5.

A separate SBOM MUST be generated for each software version. An updated version of the SBOM for a
given software version MUST be generated if and only if additional information on the included
components is provided or errors in the SBOM data are corrected. Consequently, if any component is
altered, a new software version MUST be assigned to this component; and in the case of a delivery item
SBOM also to all depending parent components.

An SBOM MUST NOT contain vulnerability information, because SBOM data is static with respect to
software that is not changing. Nonetheless, the formats for describing an SBOM may offer the ability to
include vulnerability information. Still, a document containing both SBOM and vulnerability information
does not conform to this Technical Guideline; see also section 8.1.10.

### 3.2 Terms used

#### 3.2.1 Component

A “component” as used in this Technical Guideline is a single executable file or an archive file, hence they
MUST be represented as components in the SBOM. Additionally, any other file MAY be represented as a
component. Note that an archive can be an executable file, too.

The primary component, i.e. the product itself and the root of the dependency tree from the perspective of
this SBOM, is also a "component" as used in this Technical Guideline.

For components that comprise multiple components in a manner that the original components cannot be
determined the original components SHOULD be listed with the appropriate information according to
section 5.2.2 and section 5.3.2. Information that is not available due to the way a component is assembled
has to be omitted even if it is specified as a required field, e.g. the hash or filename of the component.

For explanation of the terms used, see section 8.1.

For the collection of information about components the following principles MUST apply:

**In the case of compiled code**

The component that was used during the execution of the linker MUST be listed, even if alternative
components or implementation could have been used.

If there is – for technical reasons – no linkage run the interpreted code section applies.

Both statements apply to statically and dynamically linked components / libraries.

**In the case of interpreted code**

The version number of the component MUST reflect the exact required version, if the component is part of
the delivery item.


```
3 Basics
```
Page 8 of 20 Federal Office for Information Security

If the component is not part of the delivery item, the version number of the component SHOULD reflect
the minimum required version as defined by the component creator. This SHOULD also take into account
other factors than just the factual minimum technical requirement. This implies that the component
creator SHOULD skip versions that are end-of-life or have known security vulnerabilities. The minimum
required version MAY be determined by the minimum version, which was used for testing, e.g. because it
was used during software development.

If multiple implementations of a single dependency exist then the “least common denominator” or the
standard implementation SHOULD be used. For example:

- If a script can be run with all Bourne Shell compatible shells the component denoted in the SBOM
    should be the Bourne Shell.
- If a script can be run with any Python implementation the standard implementation must be used
    (Python) instead of an alternative implementation (Pyston).

#### 3.2.2 External component

An “external component” is a component whose component creator differs from the component creator of
the primary component.

The assignment of information to be listed in case of compiled and interpreted code is described as part of
section 3.2.1.

#### 3.2.3 Executable file

An “executable file” as used in this Technical Guideline is any file which comprises code that is executed by
a computer, either directly or by a runtime system.

#### 3.2.4 Dependency...........................................................................................................................................................................

In this Technical Guideline a dependency is a directed requirement from one component to another
component. This is regardless whether a component is a dependency (as a technical term) or contained in
the component, e.g. statically linked or embedded.

#### 3.2.5 Vendor/Supplier vs. creator

In this Technical Guideline, a distinction is made between “Vendor” and “Creator”, since “Manufacturer”
may be interpreted as combining these two roles in the sense of “vendor of self-created software” (as the
German term “Hersteller” is usually interpreted).

“Vendor” (German: “Anbieter”) describes the role of the entity that provides the software or component.
Alternatively, but not necessarily with a commercial background the terms “Supplier” (German: “Lieferant”)
are used.

“Creator” (German: “Ersteller”) describes the role of the entity that authored or created the software or
component. Alternatively, the term “Author” (German: “Autor”) is used.

As the CRA is a market access regulation and this Technical Guideline specifies technical requirements, this
Technical Guideline uses a different terminology than defined by the CRA. Therefore, this Technical
Guideline does not mention the terms “Economic Operator”, “Distributor” or “Importer”, as the roles of
these parties are unrelated to the technical requirements stated here. These technical requirements are
independent of the role that is fulfilling them.


## 4 SBOM formats

Federal Office for Information Security Page 9 of 20

4 SBOM formats

A newly generated or updated SBOM MUST be in JSON- or XML-format that meets one of the following
specifications in one of the specified versions.

- CycloneDX^9 , version 1. 5 or higher
- Software Package Data eXchange (SPDX)^10 , version 2.2.1 or higher

The transitional system of this Technical Guideline is specified in section 7.

(^9) https://cyclonedx.org/specification/overview/
(^10) https://spdx.dev/specifications/


## 5 Content requirements

Page 10 of 20 Federal Office for Information Security

5 Content requirements

### 5.1 Level of detail

For an SBOM that is compliant with this Technical Guideline, recursive dependency resolution MUST be
performed at least for each component included in the scope of delivery **on each path** downward at least up
to and including the first component that is outside the scope of delivery (see Annex, section 8.2.4). If the
primary component depends on multiple instances of a component which have different meta-
information, all these instances MUST be listed separately with their individual meta-information.

SBOMs of used components MAY be linked instead of being merged into the SBOM of the primary
component, if and only if they are compliant with this Technical Guideline.

This SBOM MUST contain the same information as available during the build process or equivalent
information where the build process does not exist (for details related to Build SBOM, see Annex,
section 8.3.3).

### 5.2 Required data fields

#### 5.2.1 Required data fields for the SBOM itself

Each SBOM MUST contain at least the following information:

_Table 2 : Required data fields for the SBOM itself_

**_Data field Description_**
Creator of the SBOM Email address of the entity that created the SBOM. If no email address is
available this MUST be a “Uniform Resource Locator (URL)”, e.g. the
creator’s home page or the project’s web page.
Timestamp Date and time of the SBOM data compilation according to the
specification of the formats (see section 4 )

#### 5.2.2 Required data fields for each component

For each component included in an SBOM, at least the following information MUST be provided^11 :

_Table 3 : Required data fields for each component_

**_Data field Description_**
Component creator Email address of the entity that created and, if applicable,
maintains the respective component. If no email address is
available this MUST be a “Uniform Resource Locator (URL)”, e.g.
the creator’s home page or the project’s web page.
Component name Name assigned to the component by its creator. If no name is
assigned this MUST be the actual filename.

(^11) cf. https://www.ntia.gov/files/ntia/publications/sbom_minimum_elements_report.pdf sections IV and V as
well as
https://www.ntia.gov/sites/default/files/publications/ntia_sbom_framing_2nd_edition_20211021_0.pdf
section 2.2 and https://www.ntia.gov/files/ntia/publications/ntia_sbom_formats_energy_brief_2021.pdf
page 5.


5 Content requirements

Federal Office for Information Security Page 11 of 20

**_Data field Description_**
Component version Identifier used by the creator to specify changes in the component
to a previously created version. Identifiers according to Semantic
Versioning^12 or alternatively Calendar Versioning^13 SHOULD be
used if one determines the versioning scheme. Existing identifiers
MUST NOT be changed for this purpose.
If no version is assigned this MUST be the creation date of the file
expressed as full-date according to RFC 333914 section 5.6. To
determine the creation time the file metadata MUST be consulted.
Filename of the component The actual filename of the component (i.e. not its path); see also
section 3.2.
Dependencies on other components Enumeration of all components on which this component is
directly dependent, according to requirements in section 5.1, or
which this component contains according to requirements in
section 3.2.1.
Associated licences Associated licence(s) of the component from the perspective of the
SBOM creator. For specifics see sections 6.1 and 8.1.9.
Hash value of the deployable
component

Cryptographically secure checksum (hash value) of the
deployed/deployable component (i.e. as a file on a mass storage
device) as SHA- 512 ; see also section 3.2.
Executable property Describes whether the component is executable; possible values
are “executable” and “non-executable”; see also section 8.1.
Archive property Describes whether the component is an archive; possible values are
“archive” and “no archive”; see also section 8.1.
Structured property Describes whether the component is a structured file, i.e. metadata
of the contents is still present (see section 3.2.1); possible values are
“structured” and “unstructured”; see also section 8.1.
If a component contains both structured and unstructured parts
the value “structured” MUST be used.

### 5.3 Additional data fields

#### 5.3.1 Additional data fields for the SBOM itself

Each SBOM MUST additionally include the following information, if it exists and its prerequisites are
fulfilled:

_Table 4 : Additional data fields for the SBOM itself_

**_Data field Description_**
SBOM-URI “Uniform Resource Identifier (URI)” of this SBOM

#### 5.3.2 Additional data fields for each component

For each component included in an SBOM, the following information MUST additionally be provided, if it
exists and its prerequisites are fulfilled:

(^12) https://semver.org/
(^13) https://calver.org/
(^14) https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc


```
5 Content requirements
```
Page 12 of 20 Federal Office for Information Security

_Table 5 : Additional data fields for each component_

**_Data field Description_**
Source code URI “Uniform Resource Identifier (URI)” of the source code of the component,
e.g. the URL of the utilised source code version in its repository, or if a
version cannot be specified the utilised source code repository itself.
URI of the deployable form of
the component

“Uniform Resource Identifier (URI)”, which points directly to the
deployable (e.g. downloadable) form of the component.
Other unique identifiers Other identifiers that can be used to identify the component or to look it
up in relevant databases, such as Common Platform Enumeration (CPE) or
Package URL (purl).
Concluded licences The licence(s) that the licensee of the component has concluded for this
component. For specifics see sections 6.1 and 8.1.9.

### 5.4 Optional data fields

#### 5.4.1 Optional data fields for each component

Each SBOM MAY additionally include the following information, if it exists and its prerequisites are
fulfilled:

_Table 6 : Optional data fields for each component_

**_Data field Description_**
Declared licences The licence(s) that the licensor of the component has declared for this
component. For specifics see sections 6.1 and 8.1.9.
Hash value of the source code of
the component

```
Cryptographically secure checksum (hash value) of the component source
code. A specific algorithm how to create a hash value of multiple source
files or a source code tree, and which hash algorithm is utilised for that has
not yet been determined.
```
Note: This list is not meant to be exhaustive.


## 6 Express specifications

Federal Office for Information Security Page 13 of 20

6 Express specifications

This section explicitly specifies aspects of section 5 in detail.

### 6.1 Licence identifiers and expressions

Principles of licence identification:

1. Licences MUST be referred to (in the sense of “named”) by their appropriate SPDX licence identifier or
    licence expression based on such an identifier. This reference is made with so-called “identifiers for
    licences and licence expressions”^15.
2. Indication of licence identifiers not defined by SPDX
    If an appropriate licence identifier can neither be found in the list maintained by SPDX or constructed by
    an SPDX licence expression based on a defined licence identifier, the licence database “Scancode
    LicenseDB AboutCode”^16 MUST be consulted next. Identifiers from this database use the prefix
    **LicenseRef-scancode-[...]** in their SPDX licence identifier to indicate their origin.
3. Licences which cannot be assigned to an extant identifier or licence expression based on an extant
    identifier
    If an appropriate licence identifier cannot be discovered in any of the established identifier lists, the
    prefix **LicenseRef-<licence_inventorising_entity>-[...]** MUST be used according to “Annex D: SPDX License
    Expressions”^17 to assign a unique (for each LicenseRef namespace) licence identifier.

For license identification the following principles of license similarity MUST be applied:

- Licences are similar if they can be mapped to another licence according to “Annex B: License Matching
    Guidelines and Templates”^18.
- Placeholders and templates in licence texts
    If placeholders and templates exist in licence texts, a replacement of these placeholders and templates by
    individualised content MUST NOT be understood as a licence modification, but MUST be assigned to the
    same licence identifier.
- SPDX operators and licence concatenations
    Licence expressions of multiple licensing, licence choices and licence exceptions MUST be mapped with
    SPDX operators. The licence operators link licence identifiers. Permitted operators MUST be selected
    according to “Annex D: SPDX License Expressions”.
- Exception clauses for licences
    If an exception clause is attached to a licence text, it MUST be attached to a licence identifier with **WITH**
    according to the allowed SPDX operators. The names of the exception clause MUST be described with
    identifiers analogous to the requirements on licence identification^19.
- Text modifications
    If a wording in a licence text is slightly modified compared to a licence text of a licence with a known
    licence identifier, this licence identifier SHOULD be used for the modified licence if the modification is
    not substantial. Examples are the addition or removal of liability-clauses or remarks to existing
    trademarks.

(^15) https://spdx.org/licenses/
(^16) https://scancode-licensedb.aboutcode.org/
(^17) https://spdx.github.io/spdx-spec/v2.3/SPDX-license-expressions/
(^18) https://spdx.github.io/spdx-spec/v2.3/license-matching-guidelines-and-templates/
(^19) https://spdx.github.io/spdx-spec/v2.3/SPDX-license-list/#a2-exceptions-list


## 7 Transitional system

Page 14 of 20 Federal Office for Information Security

7 Transitional system

The version with the highest version number of this Technical Guideline available on BSI’s website is called
the “most recent version”. To be compliant to this Technical Guideline, the most recent version MUST be
used for the generation of SBOMs. Any previous version MUST NOT be applied, except for the immediately
preceding version which MAY be applied to generate SBOMs compliant to this Technical Guideline up to six
months after a new "most recent version" has been published.

Unless otherwise defined, an SBOM version compliant to this Technical Guideline at the delivery date of
this SBOM version remains complaint to the Technical Guideline, even if new versions of this Technical
Guideline have been published afterwards. Consequently, consumers of SBOMs SHOULD be able to
interpret SBOM versions that were compliant to this Technical Guideline at the time being delivered.


## 8 Annex........................................................................................................................................................................................................

Federal Office for Information Security Page 15 of 20

8 Annex

This section provides additional, explanatory information.

While the sections 3 to 5 set normative requirements for contents, extent and format of a Software Bill of
Materials (SBOM), this section is intended to provide helpful information on these requirements. This
includes reasons for certain requirements, further explanation of some of the terms used and examples.

### 8.1 Explanations

This section provides more information on certain terms or definitions in this Technical Guideline.

#### 8.1.1 Machine-processable

SBOMs are defined as machine-processable files in this Technical Guideline. This implies that machines can
create, read, modify, process, analyse and evaluate the content and act based on the data. The content itself
is well-defined and structured. The term “machine-readable” can be interpreted in multiple ways and is
therefore not used.

#### 8.1.2 Components

In this Technical Guideline a “component” must be a single executable file^20 or an archive file. Note that an
archive can be an executable file, too. The use of the term “file” is necessary in order to unambiguously
define which objects this Technical Guideline applies to.

#### 8.1.3 Executable property

Examples for executable files include compiled binaries (“executables”), interpreted code (e.g. Python, Shell,
Java) and shared libraries. Not covered by the term are, e.g. configuration files, graphic files, documentation.

#### 8.1.4 Archive property

An archive is a combination of multiple components.

Note: Compression of an archive does not change this property.

#### 8.1.5 Structured property

Structured archives contain metadata so that the original components can still be determined afterwards.
Examples include containers, packages, ISO images, and archives as .zip, .tar, .tar.gz, .7z.

Unstructured archives do not contain such metadata, i.e. information about their structure is not embedded
in the file. Examples for unstructured archives include firmware images or other archives that are not
decomposable into their original components.

Note: Binaries containing statically linked libraries are unstructured, executable files, with the exception of
self-extracting archives which are structured archives while they are executable files and potentially contain
a statically linked decompression algorithm.

#### 8.1.6 Component creator

If the source file of a component is cloned, or if the maintainer of a component renames the project, or if the
contents of the components source code (if applicable) is changed, the maintainer steps into the role of the
component creator.

(^20) see also https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Executable


```
8 Annex
```
Page 16 of 20 Federal Office for Information Security

#### 8.1.7 Scope of delivery

The scope of delivery of a software product comprises all parts of software, originated by the supplier or a
third party, that are delivered with the software product. Not included by this term are parts of software that
have to be acquired or obtained separately.

#### 8.1. 8 Path to component

A path to a component is defined as tuple of edges that connect nodes which lead to this specific
component. It starts at the primary component and ends at this specific component. Note, that multiple
paths to a single component exist if this component is depended upon by multiple, disjunct components. A
path connects two nodes and may lead across other nodes; hence a path clearly denotes a specific chain of
nodes. Consequently, if a component has _n_ direct dependencies there are at least _n_ paths across this node,
each of them across a different direct dependency of this component.

#### 8.1.9 Licence Information

The required fields for every component include licence information. On the one hand handling licence
information is a common use case for SBOMs. On the other hand licence information can be crucial in
handling vulnerabilities, e.g. if the licence of a component does not allow the user to modify the code to
mitigate a vulnerability.

Declared licences are all licences that have been declared by the creator of a component.

A special case is that the primary licensee is forced by the component creator to choose from different sets
of licences which are mutually exclusive. A classic example is Qt where the primary licensee has to decide
between GPL and a proprietary licence; only the made choice can be handed further down the supply chain.
Hence the associated licences can differ from the declared licences.

Associated licences are all licences under which a component can be used by the licensee.

Concluded licences are determined by the licensee that is the component creator of the primary component
of the current SBOM.

The statement about multiple component instances with different meta-information also applies if only the
licence information differs.

#### 8.1.10 Vulnerability information

The SBOM definition in this Technical Guideline states that vulnerability information is not contained in an
SBOM. Information on vulnerabilities of a certain version of a software changes over time while the crucial
information of an SBOM (e.g. on dependencies) is static. If vulnerability information is included in an
SBOM, this static data is unnecessarily propagated along the software supply chain in unaltered form each
time the vulnerability information is updated. Consequently, it is required not to include vulnerability
information in an SBOM, even though an SBOM format specification supports that. The recommended
format for distributing vulnerability information is CSAF (including also VEX as a profile).

#### 8.1.11 Digital Signature

Ideally, SBOMs should be digitally signed so recipients can verify their authenticity.

### 8.1. 12 BOM links

If the creator of an SBOM uses external BOM links to reference SBOM information, this creator is
responsible for the availability of the referenced SBOM information. The goal is to provide the SBOM
information as if the SBOM creator provided the complete information themselves.


8 Annex

Page 17 of 20 Federal Office for Information Security

## 8.2 Level of detail of an SBOM

Structurally, an SBOM can be created in different levels of detail, e.g. according to the following
classification.

### 8.2.1 Top-level SBOM

```
In addition to the full description
of the primary component, the
SBOM contains the full
description of all components,
which the primary component
directly depends on.
```
### 8.2.2 n - level SBOM

```
In addition to the full description
of the primary component, the
SBOM contains the full
description of all components,
which are directly or transitively
depended upon via n levels by the
primary component. This means
that the recursive resolution of the
transitive dependencies is limited
to n steps in depth. If the path
from the primary component is
shorter than n levels, all
components on this path have to
be resolved and, consequently,
fully described.
A top-level SBOM is a 1-level
SBOM.
```
```
Level 0
```
```
Level 1
```
```
Level 2
```
```
Level 3
```
```
Level 4
```
```
Level 5 at least contained in the SBOM
```
```
internal / external component
in the scope of delivery / outside
the scope of delivery
```
```
Level 0
```
```
Level 1
```
```
Level 2
```
```
Level 3
```
```
Level 4
```
```
Level 5 at least contained in the SBOM
```
```
internal / external component
in the scope of delivery / outside
the scope of delivery
```
## Figure 1 : Top-level SBOM

## Figure 2 : n-level SBOM for n=


```
8 Annex
```
Page 18 of 20 Federal Office for Information Security

### 8.2.3 Transitive SBOM

In addition to the full description
of the primary component, the
SBOM contains information on at
least all components, which are
directly or transitively depended
upon by the primary component.
The full description and recursive
resolution of components and
their dependencies is performed
**on each path** at least up to and
including the first external
component (i.e. third-party
component). This component
must also be fully described in the
SBOM except for the
dependencies of this component.
Consequently, the dependencies
of external components do not
have to be resolved.

Compared to an n-level SBOM including a first external component the transitive SBOM may contain less
information on this external component, because a transitive SBOM does not need to describe the
dependencies of this external component.

### 8.2.4 Delivery item SBOM

In addition to the full description
of the primary component, the
SBOM contains the full
description of at least all
components, which belong to the
scope of delivery and are directly
or transitively depended upon by
the primary component. The full
description and recursive
resolution of components and
their dependencies is performed
**on each path** at least up to and
including the first component,
which is outside the scope of
delivery. This component must
also be fully described in the
SBOM except for the
dependencies of this component;
c

```
Level 0
```
```
Level 1
```
```
Level 2
```
```
Level 3
```
```
Level 4
```
```
Level 5 at least contained in the SBOM
```
```
internal / external component
in the scope of delivery / outside
the scope of delivery
```
```
onsequently, these dependencies do not have to be resolved.
```
```
Level 0
```
```
Level 1
```
```
Level 2
```
```
Level 3
```
```
Level 4
```
```
Level 5 at least contained in the SBOM
```
```
internal / external component
in the scope of delivery / outside
the scope of delivery
```
_Figure 3 : Transitive SBOM_

## Figure 4 : Delivery item SBOM


8 Annex

Federal Office for Information Security Page 19 of 20

### 8.2.5 Complete SBOM

```
In addition to the full description
of the primary component, the
SBOM contains the full
description of all components,
which are directly or transitively
depended upon by the primary
component. The full description
and recursive resolution of the
components and their
dependencies is carried out
completely.
```
## 8.3 SBOM classification

Depending on how or when an SBOM is created as part of the development, delivery, installation and
execution process of a component, the data differs, which is available in that specific situation.
Consequently, the information that can be compiled in the SBOM also differs. A common differentiation is
to distinguish between the following SBOM classes.

### 8.3. 1 Design SBOM

The SBOM is created based on the planned set of included components of a new software artefact. The
components do not have to exist yet.

### 8.3.2 Source SBOM

The SBOM is created from the development environment, the source files and the dependencies it uses.

### 8.3.3 Build SBOM

The SBOM is created as part of the build process based on e.g. source files, dependency information, already
created components, volatile build process data and other SBOMs.

Notes:

- In order to enable capturing executable, binary components that already exist (i.e. precompiled code),
    creating a Build SBOM focuses on the linker run for translated code, not the compiler run.
- In order to let hash values unambiguously identify components, reproducible builds have to be
    employed.
- In the case of interpreted code, only the source code exists; each executable file has to be listed as a
    component. The interpreter has to be specified as a dependency, as far as reasonably possible.

```
Level 0
```
```
Level 1
```
```
Level 2
```
```
Level 3
```
```
Level 4
```
Level (^5) at least contained in the SBOM
internal / external component
in the scope of delivery / outside
the scope of delivery
_Figure 5 : Complete SBOM_


```
8 Annex
```
Page 20 of 20 Federal Office for Information Security

### 8.3.4 Analysed SBOM

The SBOM is created after the build process by analysing artefacts such as executables, packages, containers
and virtual machine images. This type is also referred to as “3rd party SBOM”.

### 8.3.5 Deployed SBOM

The SBOM provides an inventory of the software on a system. This can be a compilation of other SBOMs,
taking into account configuration options and examination of execution behaviour in a (possibly simulated)
deployment environment.

### 8.3.6 Runtime SBOM

The SBOM is created using the system executing the software to capture running (i.e. executing)
components as well as their external calls and dynamically loaded components at runtime only (i.e. in
memory). This type may also be referred to as “Dynamic SBOM”.

## 8.4 Further information

### 8.4.1 Information from the NTIA

The “National Telecommunications and Information Administration (NTIA)” of the “United States
Department of Commerce” offers a great deal of further information on the subject of SBOM at
https://ntia.gov/sbom.

### 8.4.2 Information from CISA

The Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA) of the United States Department of Homeland
Security also offers further information on SBOM at https://cisa.gov/sbom.


